# Transcriptome_profiling_6maize_inbred_lines
Data provided from RNAseq analysis of 6 maize line

## Response of Zea mays transcriptome to maize lethal necrosis (MLN) disease
# SUMMARY
Maize lethal necrosis (MLN) threatens Sub-Saharan Africa's food security, with few commercial inbred lines showing tolerance. This study analyzes four lines with varying MLN resistance levels. Transcriptomic analysis revealed gene expression patterns responding to MLN-causing viruses, highlighting innate immunity components like R genes and virus resistance pathways, including RNAi and ubiquitin-proteasome systems. Expression differential of translation initiation factors, eIF4E and eIF4G, was notable, with some showing phenotypic correlation. This experiment offers new prospects for breeding or engineering MLN-resistant maize germplasm.
# ABSTRACT
Maize lethal necrosis (MLN) poses a serious threat to food security in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), with only a few commercial inbred lines displaying tolerance to the disease. Some of the commercial lines have been shown to exhibit different levels of MLN tolerance, ranging from moderately resistant to susceptible. We report transcriptomic analysis of four commercially used inbred lines with differing levels of resistance to MLN. RNA-Seq analysis revealed clusters of differentially expressed genes in response to infection with maize chlorotic mottle virus and sugarcane mosaic virus, which together cause the MLN disease. In addition to identifying components of the plant innate immune systems, which included differentially regulated  R genes, this study revealed the activation of virus resistance pathways, the major ones being RNAi silencing via the Argonaute family protein (AGO) and ubiquitin-proteasome systems (UPS). Various RING/U-box families of genes from the UPS were differentially expressed across the four lines, and the expression levels correlated with their respective levels of resistance to MLN. From the expression patterns of transcription factor (TF) families, we discovered that the TFs  WRKY, bHLH, NAC, and MYB were induced in response to MLN inoculation. We also show that the expression of translation initiation/elongation factor genes, eIF4E and eIF4G, was correlated with the level of MLN resistance. Our findings provide gene candidates for engineering or selection for MLN resistance in maize germplasm from SSA.
Keywords: Maize, viruses, MCMV, SCMV, MLN, gene expression, RNA-seq, disease resistance
